Are we alone?
Recent amazing
discoveries have given us
more hope than ever that our
universe is full of life.
So why don't we see it?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Why don't we see
alien civilizations?
We've asked this question
before here on "Space Time,"
and if you haven't
seen that episode
you should check it out.
But today we'd like to go deeper
because it really does seem
like there should be aliens.
The Kepler Space
Observatory has told
us there are a couple
of hundred billion nice,
watery planets in the Milky Way
and probably billions of them
are Earth-sized planets
around sun-like stars.
Many of them have
been around long
enough to produce
a civilization that
could have easily colonized
the entire galaxy by now.
So why is the Milky
Way so un "Star Warsy?"
This genuine oddity is referred
to as the Fermi paradox
and the resolution
for it has to be
that there's some
sort of great filter
that either makes
intelligent life extremely
rare in the first place or
that wipes out, essentially,
all advanced
civilizations before they
get to the galactic
empire stage,
whether by a nuclear war,
environmental catastrophe,
accidentally making
a black hole that
swallows the planet, et cetera.
Personally, I'm not buying it.
I just don't think that there's
an inevitable great filter
still ahead of us.
As we saw in a
previous episode, we're
not so far from building
starships ourselves.
Surely, some
civilizations must make it
through these growing pains
and manage to reach the stars.
So where are they?
Well, there's another deeply
sad and deeply inspiring
possibility.
Humanity may be one of the
very first interstellar species
in the history of the galaxy.
But before we get all emo,
let's science this right.
We know of exactly one
instance of intelligent life
happening, the case of Earth.
And as if it wasn't hard
enough to do statistics
with a sample size
of one, we also
have to deal with a
massive selection bias.
Of course we're going to
observe at least one instance
of intelligent life happening
because we are that one
instance.
In a way, it doesn't matter
how improbable sentience is.
As long as it
happens once, it will
be there to observe itself.
Here we're touching on the
anthropic principle, which
states that an
observer will always
observe a universe that can make
observers or a planet that can.
We'll talk about the
cosmic implications
of this more in another
episode, but for now we
need to acknowledge
that this selection
bias allows that life could be
extremely rare, or even unique.
Given that, can we even begin
to assess the likelihood of life
out there?
Yeah, we can science anything.
So let's dig into whether
we should really expect
to see a Salarian Empire.
Let's take the knowns.
Now, Earth certainly
required a number
of very special
conditions to build life
and it's hard to know how
essential each of these was
or how frequently
these conditions are
met through the galaxy.
I'm going to avoid
details of the biology
here because we
can say a lot just
based on how much
time it took to get
through each step on the path
to building technological life.
We can crudely summarize
the big leaps that lead up
to intelligent life
as one, assembly
of self replicating RNA
from organic molecules;
two, RNA based
proto-cells; three, DNA
and the first actual cell-- this
is the moment of a biogenesis,
life from not life; four,
increasingly complex
single cells; five, the first
multicellular organisms so
plants, animals, et cetera; and
six, the first intelligent life
form capable of counting
to six on You Tube.
Now, the crazy thing,
the thing that I
find the least intuitive,
is that the first three
steps in that chain
combined-- the appearance
of true cellular
life-- happened faster
than any of those later steps.
so fast, in fact, that
it seems hard to believe.
And in fact, so fast
that our galaxy probably
should be brimming with
at least simple life.
Let me explain.
See, around four
billion years ago,
pretty much just after the
Earth had first cooled down
from being a giant
hellish magma bowl,
we think that it
totally got pounded
by a meteor storm that
lasted a couple of hundred
million years.
This is the late
heavy bombardment,
and it probably
obliterated the surface.
We think we know this
because we flew to the moon
and found evidence of it.
Up until recently, the
earliest known evidence
of life dated to roughly
3.5 billion years ago,
fossilized blue green algae
beds-- stromatolites--
found in Western Australia.
The place was covered in
this greenish-purple slime
that reeked of rotten eggs.
Yeah, the beach was
horrible back then.
Basically, Earth was once
a giant slimeball planet.
And it looks like Earth
went from magma ball
to slimeball in less
than 300 million years.
What?
That seems crazy fast.
But it also suggests
that this first step,
the genesis of life, is
not the great filter.
But wait, the abiogenesis
thing gets even weirder.
See, nature has provided
us with a perfect time
capsule for studying
the very early Earth,
zircons-- super hard silicate
crystals whose formation
can be dated precisely by
the ratio of decaying uranium
versus lead decay
product locked inside.
And get this, just
recently a zircon
was found containing the
possible signature of life
and dated at 4.1
billion years ago,
from before the late
heavy bombardment.
That little crystal
contains what
looks like biogenic carbon.
That's a fancy way of saying
there's too little carbon
13 compared to carbon 12.
See, photosynthetic
finds C12 a bit yummier,
and so it absorbs more of
that than the heavier C13.
Pretty much all carbon
enters the biosphere
from the photosynthesizing
bottom of the food chain.
Any carbon that's been
through living systems
will have the same C13
light isotopic ratio
that we see in this zircon.
Now, there are other
nonbiogenic explanations,
but this is extremely suggestive
that life was abundant on Earth
remarkably soon after it
first coalesced from stardust
and that life either survived
the late heavy bombardment
or formed again after that
or the late heavy bombardment
never happened.
That's actually a
possibility, too.
But either way, it
looks like Earth
became a slimeball teeming with
life in a crazy short amount
of time.
How on earth did this happen?
Two options.
One, given the right
conditions the genesis of life
happens like that, and two, it
didn't happen on Earth-- life
was seeded from space, an
idea called panspermia.
Look, there's no question
that lots of rock
gets ejected into space
after meteor impacts
and can move between planets.
We've found plenty of
meteorites originally from Mars.
A lot of the ejecta
from Earth is
going to be swarming in bugs.
Could similar
bacterial astronauts
have once survived an
interstellar journey to Earth?
Some bacteria are
certainly hardy enough
to survive launch and landing.
This has been tested.
If these bacteria
were frozen solid,
they could plausibly survive
a very, very long journey
and you only need one out
of billions to make it.
Maybe the solar wind
pushes infested material
into interstellar
space so that tens
of thousands, even millions,
of years later a single bug
winds up on a brand new planet
and boom, instant slimeball.
Questionable, but it
would mean that life only
needs to evolve once from
scratch in any given galaxy.
Now, this should
be very testable.
Earth was infested
fast, so that means
this stuff should be out there.
Mars must have been
hit when it had water.
Did it go slimeball?
There should be something
like stromatolite fossils
on its ancient surface.
We haven't seen them yet,
but they'd be hard to spot.
These cosmic cooties should
be findable in space, too.
So either fast abiogenesis
or panspermia, one of them
must be true.
However, both suggest
that the galaxy
should be teeming with slimeball
planets filled with life.
Now, that's exciting.
We don't have a telescope
to find them yet,
but we could soon.
These planets will
have atmospheres
driven by biotic processes.
If we could analyze
light passing
through these
atmospheres, we would
see signatures of
oxygen, ozone, methane,
nitrous oxide at concentrations
impossible without a biosphere.
Properly fund NASA and
its terrestrial planet
finder and we could find
extraterrestrial life
within 20 years.
So it's entirely
possible that we'll soon
discover that the galaxy
is filled with life.
But this just makes it
weirder that the Milky
Way isn't swarming with
ancient alien civilizations.
There is a filter, but it's
not the genesis of life.
The clue might be that the
Earth stayed a slimeball
for nearly three billion years.
The first multicellular organism
turned up only 600 to 800
million years ago
and life as we know
it quickly exploded after that.
Was this a random lucky event
that we just had to wait for?
No, multicellular life evolved
independently dozens of times.
It just took a really long
time for those single cells
to become complex enough
to form large collaborative
structures capable of
collective reproduction, i.e.
plants, animals, a species
capable of making the Kerbal
Space Program.
And speaking of space
programs, technological life
took a little while
longer, but not
really so long on the overall
scale once we had complex life.
After the Cambrian Explosion, it
was only around half a billion
years to go from
jellyfish to moon landing.
Of course, maybe the
emergence of intelligence
is a random and unlikely
event, and this one
is the hardest to assess.
However, it's worth
noting that we
do have other
species on Earth that
seem to be moving down the same
big brain path independently
of humans.
So what is the great filter?
Maybe it's just time.
If life is common, then of the
billions of Earth-like planets
in the galaxy, only
a tiny fraction
needed to have a small
head start on us in order
to have produced the
Federation of Planets
and Stargates and stuff by now.
So what if humanity
started early?
Of all of the sun-like
stars and Earth-like planets
that will ever form over
the full past and future
history of star formation in
our universe, Earth is early.
It's part of the
first 8%, according
to recent Hubble Space
Telescope based calculations.
We have emerged in the
epoch of life in a universe
abundant in the rich resources
of past supernova explosions,
but after the violence of the
starburst and quasar epochs.
It strains
believability to imagine
that life didn't or
won't happen elsewhere,
but it is possible that we
are a very early outlier
and that any other civilizations
are so distant as to not yet be
apparent.
Is humanity a first
generation intelligence,
one of the species that
will watch and maybe guide
as other intelligent life
emerges throughout the galaxy?
Well, there's something to work
towards on the next episode
of "Space Time."
Last week we talked about
Miguel Alcubierre's warp drive.
You guys had a lot to say.
Let's do it.
A lot if you noticed
my mistake in saying
that Miguel Alcubierre is
Spanish, rather than Mexican.
That was my mistake.
We cram a lot of details into
each episode of "Space Time"
and sometimes things like
this do slip through,
so thank you for catching it.
Miguel Alcubierre was, in fact,
born in Mexico and, in fact,
educated up to
master's level there.
Eric Vilas wonders
what it would look
like seeing an
Alcubierre warp bubble
race by from the outside.
This is tricky.
The bubble would
definitely leave some sort
of light signature because
light inside the bubble
can traverse the walls in any
direction besides forwards
and our negative mass matter
may also end up on the outside.
Because the bubble
is superluminal,
any light that we see
would trail the bubble just
like the sound of
a supersonic jet.
Ahead of the bubble,
you'd see nothing
unless it stopped, in which case
all the photons and particles
that are captured on its journey
would blast you into oblivion.
Now, a few of you took
issue with my statement
that it's never aliens.
And fair enough, it's never
aliens until it's aliens.
The point of this philosophy
is that the alien hypothesis
is a bad place to start
because you can explains almost
any weird natural phenomenon
as having been produced
by a super intelligent,
extremely high tech
civilization with
inscrutable motives.
Really anything.
It's a week hypothesis
until you've generally
ruled out everything else or
you actually see the mother ship
and take an unsuspiciously
blurry photo of it.
So Nate asks if we can please
do another challenge episode.
Absolutely, we'll do one soon.
[MUSIC PLAYING]